---
title: "A structure-based nomenclature for Bacillus thuringiensis and other bacteria-derived pesticidal proteins"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-11-22-JIP
date: 2021-11-22
venue: 'Database, Volume 2022, 2022, baac022'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022201120301440'
citation: Neil Crickmore, Colin Berry, Suresh Panneerselvam, Ruchir Mishra, Thomas R Connor, Bryony C Bonning, A structure-based nomenclature for Bacillus thuringiensis and other bacteria-derived pesticidal proteins, JIP 2021-11-22'
---


Abstract: In 1998 a nomenclature for the growing list of pesticidal proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) was 
derived based solely on protein sequence comparisons. This nomenclature was widely adopted and provided a robust 
framework for the naming and classification of the proteins. The success of these proteins in integrated pest 
management schemes prompted an increased effort to find others with improved or more diverse activities. 
These discovery activities led to the characterization of proteins from a wider range of bacteria and with a 
variety of different protein folds. Since most of these new proteins were grouped together as Cry proteins it 
became apparent that the existing nomenclature had limitations in representing the diverse range of proteins 
that had been identified. This revised nomenclature retains the basic principles of the 1998 version but 
provides specific mnemonics to represent different structural groups. For the purposes of consistency, the 
vast majority of the proteins have either retained their name or have a new name that clearly references 
the previous one. Other pesticidal proteins not previously included in the nomenclature have been incorporated 
into this version.
