---
title: "BPPRC database: a web-based tool to access and analyse bacterial pesticidal proteins"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-04-22-Database
date: 2022-04-22
venue: 'Database, Volume 2022, 2022, baac022'
paperurl: 'https://academic.oup.com/database/article/doi/10.1093/database/baac022/6565650'
citation: Suresh Panneerselvam, Ruchir Mishra, Colin Berry, Neil Crickmore, Bryony C Bonning, BPPRC database: a web-based tool to access and analyse bacterial pesticidal proteins, Database 2022/04/22'
---


Abstract: Pesticidal proteins derived from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis, have provided the bases 
for a diverse array of pest management tools ranging from natural products used in organic agriculture, 
to modern biotechnological approaches. With advances in genome sequencing technologies and protein structure 
determination, an increasing number of pesticidal proteins from myriad bacterial species have been identified. 
The Bacterial Pesticidal Protein Resource Center (BPPRC) has been established to provide informational and 
analytical resources on the wide range of pesticidal proteins derived from bacteria that have potential utility 
for arthropod management. In association with a revised nomenclature for these proteins, BPPRC contains a database 
that allows users to browse and download sequences. Users can search the database for the best matches to sequences 
of interest and can incorporate their own sequences into basic informatic analyses. These analyses include the ability 
to draw and export guide trees from either whole protein sequences or, in the case of the three-domain Cry proteins, 
from individual domains. The associated website also provides a portal for users to submit protein sequences for naming. 
The BPPRC provides a single authoritative source of information to which all stakeholders can be referred including academics, 
government regulatory bodies and research and development personnel in the industrial sector. The database provides 
information on more than 1060 pesticidal proteins derived from 13 species of bacteria, including insecticidal activities 
for a subset of these proteins.
